Springboard Capstone 2: Can we predict whether a song will hit the Top 100 Billboards? 

Music is a huge part of the way people identify themselves and conenct to one another. It stands to reason that popular songs are songs that many people identify or ~vibe~ with. 


Why then, are certain songs so popular? Using Spotify's API to pull music analysis features information about Billboard yearly 100 Hit songs from 2001-2020, I will see if any features can be used to accurately predict whether a song will be a hit or not.


How to Navigate this directory: 

1. Overview Below
2. Preprocessing (Data Wrangling)
3. EDA
4. Modeling


Problem statement: Can we predict what songs will hit the top charts?
Context: Everyone has heard of “Let it Be - The Beatles”, but can we use data available on danceability, accousticness, musician/band popularity, etc. to predict what songs will make it big? 

Criteria for success: The program should be able to take a song and predict whether it will be in the top 100 Billboard chart for that year or not. 
Solution Scope: This program, when given a song title, should be able to predict if the song will be part of the Top 100 by Year on Billboards or not. 
Constraints: Only features from the Spotify API will be used as predictors.
Stakeholders: Me, Myself, and anyone who likes music!
Data Sources: Spotify API and Billboards API 

Data Sources:
Spotify API Documentation: https://developer.spotify.com/documentation/web-api/
Billboards API Documentation: https://rapidapi.com/LDVIN/api/billboard-api

Modules to investigate:
Spotipy  https://pypi.org/project/spotipy/

Methodology: 
Data Collection: 
Using the Billboard I will gather the Top 100 Songs for every year from 2001 to 2020.
Using this list of songs, I will gather the Spotify features from Spotify API and generate data for the hit songs. 
I will define “Hit” as a dummy variable “1”, or “0” where “1” is a hit song and “0” is not. 
Finally I will pull 10,000 more non-hit songs for each year 
ISSUE: how do we define this? What is relevant for the program?
Must not be part of the Billboard 100



Data Wrangling Checklist:
Get Billboard data for 2001-2020 in separate CSV files 01-20. DONE
Make sure there are no duplicates DONE
Make sure there are no missing values. DONE

EDA:

Modeling: 
Using a variety of techniques I will test what features are correlated with the song being a hit or not. 

I will then split the data into testing and training data and train a variety of models (tbd which ones) to see if the features that Spotify offers can predict (and with what accuracy) if a song will be a hit or not. 






Possible Variables:
Accousticness: A confidence measure from 0.0 to 1.0 of whether the track is acoustic. 1.0 represents high confidence the track is acoustic.

Danceability: Danceability describes how suitable a track is for dancing based on a combination of musical elements including tempo, rhythm stability, beat strength, and overall regularity. A value of 0.0 is least danceable and 1.0 is most danceable.

Duration: The duration of the track in milliseconds.

Energy: Energy is a measure from 0.0 to 1.0 and represents a perceptual measure of intensity and activity. Typically, energetic tracks feel fast, loud, and noisy. For example, death metal has high energy, while a Bach prelude scores low on the scale. Perceptual features contributing to this attribute include dynamic range, perceived loudness, timbre, onset rate, and general entropy.

Instrumentalness: Predicts whether a track contains no vocals. "Ooh" and "aah" sounds are treated as instrumental in this context. Rap or spoken word tracks are clearly "vocal". The closer the instrumentalness value is to 1.0, the greater likelihood the track contains no vocal content. Values above 0.5 are intended to represent instrumental tracks, but confidence is higher as the value approaches 1.0.

Key: The key the track is in. Integers map to pitches using standard Pitch Class notation. E.g. 0 = C, 1 = C♯/D♭, 2 = D, and so on. If no key was detected, the value is -1.

Liveness: Detects the presence of an audience in the recording. Higher liveness values represent an increased probability that the track was performed live. A value above 0.8 provides strong likelihood that the track is live

Loudness: The overall loudness of a track in decibels (dB). Loudness values are averaged across the entire track and are useful for comparing relative loudness of tracks. Loudness is the quality of a sound that is the primary psychological correlate of physical strength (amplitude). Values typically range between -60 and 0 db.

Mode: Mode indicates the modality (major or minor) of a track, the type of scale from which its melodic content is derived. Major is represented by 1 and minor is 0.

Speechiness: Speechiness detects the presence of spoken words in a track. The more exclusively speech-like the recording (e.g. talk show, audio book, poetry), the closer to 1.0 the attribute value. Values above 0.66 describe tracks that are probably made entirely of spoken words. Values between 0.33 and 0.66 describe tracks that may contain both music and speech, either in sections or layered, including such cases as rap music. Values below 0.33 most likely represent music and other non-speech-like tracks.

Tempo: The overall estimated tempo of a track in beats per minute (BPM). In musical terminology, tempo is the speed or pace of a given piece and derives directly from the average beat duration.

Time_signature: An estimated time signature. The time signature (meter) is a notational convention to specify how many beats are in each bar (or measure). The time signature ranges from 3 to 7 indicating time signatures of "3/4", to "7/4".

Valence: A measure from 0.0 to 1.0 describing the musical positiveness conveyed by a track. Tracks with high valence sound more positive (e.g. happy, cheerful, euphoric), while tracks with low valence sound more negative (e.g. sad, depressed, angry).
